.\" man page for tagbkup
.TH TAGBKUP 1 "April 5, 2011" tagbkup "tagbkup \- back up and restore mp3 tags"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.

.SH NAME

tagbkup \- back up and restore mp3 tags

.SH SYNOPSIS
.HP
\fBtagbkup\fP [ options ] \fIfilename\fP ... \fIbackupdir\fP

.SH DESCRIPTION
If you have a lot of information in your mp3 tags, you want to protect it
against accidental deletion. You could back up your mp3 files every time you
update the tags but that will take a lot of disks. Using \fBtagbkup\fP 
you can back up just the tags from your mp3 files and restore them into the
files at any time.
.PP
\fBtagbkup\fP can restore tags to your mp3 files even if the mp3 files have been
renamed or moved to different directories.
.PP
To back up your tags, create a separate directory where your tag backup will be
stored on your hard drive. Running \fBtagbkup\fP will copy all of the
tags from your mp3 files into files in that directory.
.PP
You can run \fBtagbkup\fP again and use the same backup directory to update your
backup with files whose tags have changed. Do this on a regular basis to make
sure you have backed up the most current data.
.PP
Include your tag backup directory in the list of directories backed up with your
regular backup process.
.PP
\fBtagbkup\fP also includes an option to copy tags from one mp3 to another or to
copy them to empty mp3 files of the same name in another directory. You can also
strip the tags off a file (use the \-cm option, see below).

.SH OPTIONS

\fB\-b\fP
.RS
Backup tags from mp3 files to the directory that is mentioned in the last
parameter. Any tags that are already up to date in that directory are not copied.
.RE

\fB\-r\fP
.RS
Restore tags from the directory that is mentioned in the last parameter to the
mp3 files listed before it. Any mp3 file whose tag was not backed up to that
directory will not be restored.
.RE

\fB\-c\fP
.RS
Copy tags from mp3 files to like named mp3 files in backupdir or copy tags from
an mp3 file to another mp3 file, where the output mp3 file name is supplied
instead of backupdir.
.RE

\fB\-c1\fP
.RS
Append ID3V1 tag from mp3 file to output file.
.RE

\fB\-c2\fP
.RS
Copy ID3V2 tag from mp3 file to output file, overwriting existing file.
.RE

\fB\-cm\fP
.RS
Append mp3 data without tags from mp3 file to output file. If the output file
does not exist it is created. This can be used to strip tags off a file.
.RE

\fB\-d\fP \fIdir\fP
.RS
Copy restored mp3 files to this directory. Since restoring tags always involves
copying the whole mp3 file you can save time here. If you have your mp3 files on
a cd and want to restore them to the hard drive and restore their tags you can
do this at the same time. In this case the file listing of mp3 files would be
the contents of the CD and the desired hard drive place would be in the '\-d'
parameter.
.RE

\fB\-t\fP
.RS
Test \- no copying of data. This is useful to get a preview of what will be done
in a backup or restore.
.RE

\fB\-v\fP
.RS
Verbose. This lists every input file and whether it was backed up, restored, etc.
.RE

\fB\-u\fP
.RS
Report updates done. This lists only the files that were backed up. In cases
where the latest data was already in the output directory they are not listed.
.RE

\fB\-n\fP
.RS
No overwriting of backup files, append log file. If this option is selected and
the tag data is already backed up in the output directory an additional copy of
it is created. This is useful if you are creating a first backup with several
runs of tagbkup. If you are creating a second backup of updated tags it will
start creating files with _001, _002 and these files are never restored when
running a restore.
.RE

\fB\-f\fP \fIfilename\fP
.RS
Input filename list is in file \fIfilename\fP. If you have a large number of mp3 files,
create a file with the names in it first and use this option. For example dir
/b/s *.mp3 > listfile (under windows), or find . \-name '*.mp3' > listfile under
unix or cygwin
.RE

\fB\-y\fP
.RS
Continue if there are errors, skipping failed files. If you are doing a restore
and you know that a lot of your tags were not backed up, this saves time.
.RE

\fB\-s\fP
.RS
File signature based on front part of file instead of end. The program creates a
backup file name for the tag based on the contents of the music near the end of
the file. Using this option changes it to base the backup file name on the music
near the start of the file. If this option is used for backup it must also be
used for restore. Use this option if you have faulty tag updating software that
corrupts the end of the file. My experience is that faulty tag editing software
is more likely to corrupt the start of the file. Note that these corruptions of
the file do not normally affect the listening experiencing because they only
delete a couple of thousandths of a second from the start or end of the file. I
recommend using Jampal as your tag editor because it does not corrupt the
beginning or end of the file.
.RE

\fB\-x\fP
.RS
Tags in 256 subdirectories. The tag backup files will be placed in
subdirectories named 00,01, ... up to ff, (256 in all). This has the following
advantages: 

.HP
(1) It overcomes a limitation in the FAT32 file system of 16384
files per directory, so if you have more than that number of mp3 files and you
are using FAT32 you will have to use the \-x option. 

.HP
(2) It makes it easier for
File Managers \- If you click on a directory with 16000 files in it, 
the system can hang for a minute or so while it retrieves the information. If you
use the \-x option when creating a backup, you must use it when restoring tags
and also when updating the backup. I recommend using the \-x option even if you
are using a file system that handles such large directories, beacuse the smaller
directories are more manageable.
.RE

.SH EXAMPLES
tagbkup \-v \-r \-x \-d $MAINDIR/000904_1758_rest /cdrom/*/*.mp3 $TAGBKUP/tagbkup

.RS
Restore files from a cdrom in a directory structure than includes album
directories. While restoring them copy the tags from the tag bakup in 
directory $TAGBKUP/tagbkup. Any files that have no tag backup are not copied.
.RE

.SH FILES

.IR tag_xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx_000.mp3
.RS
When creating a backup, the program creates files with names like
tag_486c9c23c09d87c8_000.mp3. The long string of hexadecimal digits identifies a
checksum of the actual mp3 sound data. This tag file is a real mp3 file
containing a few milliseconds of silence, you can examine it with a tag editing
program (e.g. load it into the jampal library). In some systems you can display
the song titles, artists, etc. in the backup files by selecting options on the
title bar.
.RE
.PP

.IR tagbkup.log
.RS
This is created in the backup directory.
This contains a list of the
backup file names and the original files they came from.
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR jampal (1)

.SH WEB
http://jampal.sourceforge.net/tagbkup.html



